[Music]
cats are famously enigmatic
so it's tough to figure out what they're
feeling by looking at their faces
happy cat angry cat
sad cat or is that the sad cat
we may not be able to figure out what
our cats are feeling
but can science shed any light on it
historically cats
aren't seen as very expressive so there
is that idea that they are
particularly cold when it comes to
interacting with us
compare that to a dog whose face seems
full of expression
empathy happiness sadness
guilt why aren't cats just as
communicative
they're not really able to frown or have
that sad sort of puppy dog eye
expression they don't seem to have the
right musculature for that
dogs and humans have evolved the levator
anguli
oculi medialis muscle responsible for
raising the inner eyebrow
which we use for showing things like
sadness and concern
but cats don't have this muscle so cats
are physically incapable
of having faces as expressive as dogs
dr finka's research suggests that cats
can communicate
some emotion on their faces it's just we
don't speak the language
so we know that the muscles of the cat's
face are quite different from other
species and certainly from humans they
use
muscles in different ways and also have
different types of muscles
and different collections of muscles
will do different things dr finker
studies how cat's faces
change when illness or injury produces
pain
this is the only feeling she can
currently say with confidence
that a cat is experiencing we are
looking at cats when they come into the
vets with a painful condition
and um we do know that they're actually
changing their expressions in relation
to how they're feeling and if they're in
pain
she's identified a set of incredibly
subtle markers
to help track their feelings we have a
series of
48 facial coordinates and we can
actually look to see how these
coordinates are altering
based on what the cat's experiencing so
whether they're in pain or not in pain
or whether they're relaxed and
comfortable or perhaps fearful or
frustrated
dr finker has identified some tell-tale
signs
such as the cat's ears turning very
slightly outwards and down
or a tiny reduction in the distance
between the cheeks
mouth and nose region
these are all signs that the cat is not
happy and in pain
but if you think this is going to usher
in a new age of cat human communication
think again it's very very subtle
so statistically it's significant but in
terms of the average cat owner trying to
look at their cat's face
it might be a little bit more
problematic
it looks like our struggle to read cat's
emotions isn't going away
anytime soon but could a cat read our
emotions
to find out researchers in the u.s
conducted a series of cognitive
behavioral tests
because it's quite difficult to test
cats we know a lot less about their
cognitive abilities
compared to dogs doesn't mean that they
don't necessarily have the same
level of skills and abilities it just
means that it's much harder for us to
find the right context to test them in
and get them to play ball in the way
that we need them to
peppa the cat has been placed in a room
with her handler
who pulls various faces at her
first up scowling can peppa detect that
this is a negative emotion and steer
clear
it appears cats are less likely to react
positively to someone they know if they
have an angry expression
next a positive smiling face
by running the test multiple times
scientists compile statistics suggesting
that a cat is more likely to approach
someone they recognize
if they are smiling at it what the
research suggests
is that they are able to differentiate
between our different expressions
and they're using this information to
change the way that they are
responding the research also suggested
that cats react more strongly to both
the positive and negative emotions of
their owners
than to those of strangers the behavior
of owners is much more important to the
cat
because we're the ones that feed the cat
and we look after them so maybe they're
more interested in paying attention to
us for that reason